---
title: What Peter Thiel taught about building companies?
date: "2023-01-06"
template: "post"
draft: false
slug: "what-peter-thiel-tells-about-building-companies"
category: "Business"
tags:
  - "startups"
description: "How to think about startups, correct way to approach problems and how to build your startup into a sustainable business."
socialImage: ""
---

**“What important truth do very few people agree with you on?”**

What does this question have to do with the business? We'll come to it a bit later. But for now, understand this - No one can predict the future exactly, but we know two things: it’s going to be different, and it must be rooted in today’s world. Most answers to the contrarian question are different ways of viewing the present and good answers to this questions are the closest thing we can have as `predicting the future accurately`.

**And How does Thiel answers his question?**

He answers to the contrarian question is that, most people think that the age of invention is over and all we'll have is Globalized knock-offs, like Invented in USA/Germany, copied by China/India/Brazil but that is not correct. The truth is socio-economic, environmental, cultural conditions are different. Initially, there might be knock offs, though adapted to local taste but cannot be a long-term solution. For example, if China or India just increase energy usage to match with their American or European counterparts, that would only result in environmental catastrophe, not riches. Therefore technology matters more, inventions matter more. 

_What important truth do very few people agree with you on?_ is difficult to answer directly. It may be easier to start with a preliminary: **what does everybody agree on?** If you can identify a delusional popular belief, you can find what lies hidden behind it: **the contrarian truth**. Nietzsche wrote (before he went mad) “Madness is rare in individuals—but in groups, parties, nations, and ages it is the rule.”

So you want to build a startup? Ask yourself, **What valuable company is nobody building?** 
This is the business version of our contrarian question. This question is harder than it looks, because your company could create a lot of value without becoming very valuable itself. Creating value is not enough—you also need to capture some of the value you create. Like Airlines create so much value for the passengers but terrible in making profits. Luxury clothing adds no value except signaling but captures a lot of value. Aim is to be like Google, Microsoft. Create a ton of value for the customer and capture a sizeable chunk for yourself as well.

Thus the question, “What important truth do very few people agree with you on?”

## Where to find secrets to build a company

Our contrarian question is nothing but a secret hidden from the entire world, revealing only to those who are looking for it. So where can you find it? The areas which are important but haven't got enough prestige or is not yet institutionalized. Because those people are allowed to think only from the conventional viewpoint. And you rarely stumble upon a secret by looking things the conventional way. And once you got the secret, tell those who you need and will trust. Those trusting early people will be your team and that secret will be your startup. 

## Why do you need a team to build the future
Bureaucratic hierarchies move slowly, and entrenched interests shy away from risk. In the most dysfunctional organizations, signaling that work is being done becomes a better strategy for career advancement than actually doing work (if this describes your company, you should quit now). At the other extreme, a lone genius might create a classic work of art or literature, but he could never create an entire industry. Startups operate on the principle that you need to work with other people to get stuff done, but you also need to stay small enough so that you actually can.

---

# How to build a business from an idea?

## The Seven Great  Business Questions

1. **The Engineering Question** - Can you create breakthrough technology (10x better) instead of incremental improvements?
2. **The Timing Question** - Is now the right time to start your particular business?
3. **The Monopoly Question** - Are you starting with a big share of a small market?
4. **The People Question** - Do you have the right team?
5. **The Distribution Question** - Do you have a way to not just create but deliver your product?
6. **The Durability Question** - Will your market position be defensible 10 and 20 years into the future?
7. **The Secret Question** - Have you identified a unique opportunity that others don’t see?

If you nail all seven, you’ll master fortune and succeed. Even getting five or six correct might work.

## Monopoly not that bad
Bad monopolies are rent collectors. They do not add any value to their users. On the other hand competition puts companies on survival mode. Everyone is miserable. The future is bleak. Thats why books like blue ocean strategy were an instant hit. 

If you can enjoy monopoly because your users love you so much, then you can earn profits, invest in R&D, and employees can be happy as well. The target should always be to reach that monopolistic state.

And competition is not bad only when it makes you more efficient, innovative, more united as a team. Rivalry becomes losing proposition even if you win the battle, when you lose sight of your target, users. That's why Bezos so compulsively obsessed over Customers. Pay attention to what competitors are doing but at the end of the day, you are there to delight users and customers.

Monopolists downplay the market they are in to avoid scrutiny. Google dominates in search market but they call themselves an advertising company, a cloud company, a SaaS company and what not. And report competitors by combining all these areas so that Congress does not consider it big enough for Anti-trust hearings. On the other hand,  Small players define the market they are in, extremely narrowly, to sound big and important. "We are the best English breakfast Restaurant in this mall".

## Characteristics of a monopoly

What does a company with large cash flows far into the future look like? Every monopoly is unique, but they usually share some combination of the following characteristics: proprietary technology, network effects, economies of scale, and branding.

This is not a list of checkboxes. But give you enough direction for your free thinking. Because Monopoly have these features.

1. **Proprietary Technology** which is at least 10x better than the available options. People are bad at math and abhor changes, unless they see a revolutionary way to do things. And for that marginal improvements don't count, 2x-3x is good but people won't switch and competition would just copy it and kill you.
10x cannot happen as improvements over current product. It has to be rethought and remade. But here lies the competitive advantage which cannot be copied and which will attract customers.

2. **Network Effects** i.e more people use your product/service, more valuable it becomes.
3. **Economies of Scale**. And not just for fixed production cost but also helpful in negotiating favorable terms with suppliers.
4. **Branding** is important to establish yourself but takes a lot of effort and money. If you do it in the initial stages rathen than spending on product, you might have a short term branding but you'll be a sinking ship. Apple's brand is helpful not because they are the best marketers but because their products too are outstanding.

## How to build a monopoly

1. Start in a niche market and monopolize.
2. Scale up by finding more such niche segments to monopolize. It can be horizontal or vertical, doesn't matter. What matters is the customer happiness. THe sole basis of this legal monopoly is that customers have made you that King.
3. Don't make speeches that you are there to disrupt, to fix a broken system. It humiliates the incumbents. You do not want to make a powerful enemy especially when you have just started. 
4. Don't obsess about being first. Being best is the goal. Positive cash flow is the goal, profitability is the goal. 
> Keep doing the disruptive work but always be humble.

## How to think about Cashflow and Growth?
Good to aim for being a monopoly but if it comes at the cost of burning investors money, you will be in a very vulnerable position. Next bear market and you might have to shut shop or get acquired. How to overcome this? By focusing on **cash flow and growth** rather than just thinking about the growth. This is the one metric that everyone agrees about it being a marker of a great business. Because cost will flat out after a point in time (if not, RED flag) and profitability will come with increased market share.

If this is not happening, you might have a million users but they will leave. Therefore do not optimize for numbers only. These are vanity metrics. Mean nothing. Best bet is always to go old school YC way. "Better to have a few users love you absolutely than many like you."

---

# Lessons from the dot com era

The entrepreneurs who stuck with Silicon Valley learned four big lessons from the dot-com crash that still guide business thinking today:
1. Make incremental advances
Grand visions inflated the bubble, so they should not be indulged. Anyone who claims to be able to do something great is suspect, and anyone who wants to change the world should be humbler. Small, incremental steps are the only safe path forward. 
2. Stay lean and flexible 
All companies must be “lean,” which is code for “unplanned.” You should not know what your business will do; planning is arrogant and inflexible. Instead, you should try things out, “iterate,” and treat entrepreneurship as agnostic experimentation. 
3. Improve on the competition 
Don’t try to create a new market prematurely. The only way to know you have a real business is to start with an already existing customer, so you should build your company by improving on recognizable products already offered by successful competitors. 
4. Focus on product, not sales
If your product requires advertising or salespeople to sell it, it’s not good enough: technology is primarily about product development, not distribution. Bubble-era advertising was obviously wasteful, so the only sustainable growth is viral growth.

These lessons have become dogma in the startup world; those who would ignore them are presumed to invite the justified doom visited upon technology in the great crash of 2000. 

**And yet the opposite principles are probably more correct:**

1. It is better to risk boldness than triviality. 
2. A bad plan is better than no plan. 
3. Competitive markets destroy profits. 
4. Sales matters just as much as product

To build the next generation of companies, we must abandon the dogmas created after the crash. That doesn’t mean the opposite ideas are automatically true: you can’t escape the madness of crowds by dogmatically rejecting them. Instead ask yourself: how much of what you know about business is shaped by mistaken reactions to past mistakes? The most contrarian thing of all is not to oppose the crowd but to think for yourself.

---















